So, welcome to TypeScript Fundamentals,
my name is Mike North.
I've been a Frontend Master's
instructor for about eight or
nine years now depending
on whether you count
when we recorded the course
versus when it came out.
So, I've been working with
Frontend Masters for a while,
I'm a principal staff engineer at Stripe,
and I'm also their tech lead for
their external facing
developer platform org.
So this is the part of the company that
makes Stripe node, the Node.js SDK,
which is written in TypeScript.
If you go to stripe.sh,
you can see a little in-browser CLI,
which is pretty cool.
So that's made by some of
the teams that I support.
And Stripe Workbench, which is kind of
like Chrome DevTools but for Stripe,
it's another big, TypeScript project.
In addition to this,
I am one of a few engineers that works
very closely with teams at
Stripe to shape the public API,
that anyone building a payments
integration on top of Stripe, uses.
We use Typescript to discuss
the API semantics and
the shapes of requests and
responses that we get, and
this powers nearly a trillion dollars
worth of payment volume every year.
So it's a very high stakes API where
getting the shapes of things right and
making it easy to build on
Stripe is really important.
And knowing how to work with types and
how to model different things with
types is of critical importance.
So that's kind of where TypeScript DNA
is helping me in my career there.
The number one goal I have for this course
is that by the end of our time together,
you should have a mental model for
how TypeScript works.
Of course we're gonna discuss a bunch
of different language features, and
how to work with variables and
arrays and objects, things like that.
But the most important thing I
wanna to leave you with is how to
think about types.
And this is what will let you not only
understand the latest TypeScript release,
but all of the releases that
follow after it, right?
I want you to have an intuition for
how these kinds of things work.
Which is better than just mastering
a particular feature of the language, and
I think we'll be able to do that today.
So for
those of you who are new to TypeScript,
let me explain a little
bit about what it is.
It's an open source project that
is maintained by Microsoft, and
it represents a syntactic
superset of JavaScript.
And what that means is,
where JavaScript's syntax ends,
you could think of that as sort
of where TypeScript begins.
This is not to say, all JavaScript
programs are valid TypeScript programs.
It's not a superset in that sense, but
all of the JavaScript syntax you know and
use every day, that is gonna work
as part of a TypeScript program.
There are three parts to TypeScript,
there's the language itself,
the programming language,
the compiler, and a language server.
The compiler is what turns TypeScript
code into clean JavaScript.
It's very readable,
you can look at the build output and
we'll be able to make
sense of it quite easily.
The language server if you've used
something like Visual Studio Code, or
WebStorm, other IDEs, it's the kind of
software component that powers those
nice little type heads and helps validate
code right as you're authoring it.
And so
that's what the language server does.
You can think of TypeScript
a little bit like a fancy linter.
The reason I encourage you
to use this mental model is,
TypeScript only does things for
you at build time.
It helps ensure that your code is correct,
but it kind of compiles away the thing
that's actually running in a browser,
or in Node.js.
That's just regular JavaScript, and that's
part of the goal of this project, right?
You should be able to use this to build
JavaScript code that can run anywhere
like on unembedded devices or in a
browser, wherever you can run JavaScript.
This is not quite the same as using
something like Java, or C sharp or
other languages that have
at runtime type validation.
There's some cost associated with that
as well to validate types at runtime.
So, think of it like something that helps
you as you're building your project, and
then it sort of melts away, and
you're left with regular JavaScript.
TypeScript is very very popular, so
I have here a little graph comparing
React to TypeScript and you can see
that even something as popular as React
is not even close to the growth
curve of TypeScript downloads.
It is starting to become
almost a ubiquitous part of
a modern frontend stack,
there's sort of varying
degrees of typing that you can use for
it, but
it is definitely a dominant
option in the space.
So why are types a big deal?
Why is TypeScript so popular?
Well, first, it lets you leave
more of your intent on the page,
as the author of a piece of code.
So if we look at this function here where
we're adding two numbers together, or
possibly concatenating two strings.
It's not very clear what the author of
this function intended to be done here.
I mean, we could look into the word add,
and try to infer,
this is addition, but you could pass
a string in for A and B and it would work.
And imagine that you did that and
then somebody comes along and
says, all right,
I need a third operand here.
It's optional,
I wanna to be able to add C to A and B.
And they default that to 0, well,
now whoever was using this for
string concatenation, they're gonna end up
with the character 0 at the end of their
string, it doesn't quite work.
We're missing some intent here,
we don't know what the author meant to do.
This is a preview of what typing
a function like this looks like, but
you can see here very clearly,
we're saying a is a number,
b is a number, and
this means we return a number.
And this is a real TypeScript
error that's popping up here,
saying an argument of type string is not
assignable to a parameter of type number.
And you can see a red squiggles underneath
the string containing a number 4.
So we're being busted on mixed use of
strings and numbers here as we should,
right?
So this represents more
information in your source code.
And I'm sure you can imagine here
where in your authoring environment,
you're getting a lot more feedback about
correct usage of all of your libraries and
other parts of your code that
maybe somebody else wrote.
You're able to sort of to find some
constraints here in terms of how these
functions are meant to be used.
So in essence,
what we're seeing here is that TypeScript
removes things that typically would be
problems at runtime into compile time, is
that you're getting this feedback earlier.
You're getting it more clearly.
You're getting it right at the call site
where you're misusing this add function.
And that's a lot more actionable,
you're gonna catch things more easily.
You don't have to wait until unit
tests catch this kind of thing,
although TypeScript's not
a replacement for unit tests, but
it does represent a greater degree of
feedback that you can get right away.
So throughout the course, you're gonna see
that we have a lot of these little code
snippets here in the website which you
can visit typescript-training.com.
And you can see this website.
These are actually rendered from
a TypeScript compiled code snippet here,
so you can hover over
these code points and
actually explore what's going on with
each of these parts of the code.
I would encourage you to do so, there's
a ton of valuable information you can get
from little tooltips, sometimes that's
where the type information is hiding.
You're going to need,
for sure, two things.
You gotta be able to access this website
that we're looking at right now, and
you're going to wanna make sure that you
can visit the official TypeScript website,
which is typescriptlang.org.
So if you wanted to just watch along,
that's what you would need.
If you want to code along with us,
which I would encourage you to do,
we're gonna have to clone a GitHub
project and work with it locally.
So that you can open up VS Code or
another editor of your choice and
work through some of
the examples as we study them.
>> What are the pros and
cons of using TypeScript for
its strict typing compared
to regular JavaScript?
Typing seems useful, but
as an experienced user,
I'm afraid that it will be hard
to understand the benefits
will be of making the language
less dynamic and more strict.
>> Yeah, I would look back at this
example that we just covered,
which kind of illustrates how this
regular JavaScript function could be
used in a variety of different ways.
Sometimes dynamic typing or duck typing,
where JavaScript kind of
attempts to use a value and
it'll try to treat
a variable as if things work
right up until the moment
things blow up or
you get an unexpected result.
So for example,
you could pass a function for
the argument A, or a class,
or an HTML DOM node.
And where you would start to hit
problems is attempting to concatenate
these things together.
Effectively, you only in JavaScript,
know things fail right at the moment
where the problematic use happens.
What TypeScript is doing for
us here is it lets us say,
all right, here's the boundary for
a unit of code and
here are the constraints
that I'm looking to apply.
And so we're getting not only a better
error that's telling us where
was the problem, specifically this
value here is the problem, but
it's telling us at the invocation site,
not deep down in the function.
I mean, imagine a + b,
this is a much more intricate function.
Imagine there are promises involved or
there's some async error that happens.
It's easier to debug something like this,
and particularly as code
bases get more complex and you have
a lot of data moving around and you
have some very interesting data structures
to hold a lot of different things.
JavaScript gets to a point
sometimes where you start tripping
over your own shoelaces, right?
There's not enough that you can hold all
of the conventions you've established in
your own mind, and TypeScript helps
you put that in the source code.
Yeah, Kevin has a great comment in chat.
Add the string 1 to the string 1,
and you get back the string 11.
You might not even catch that bug,
that's a good point with this.
Even in the TypeScript case, I mean, you
would catch that bug cuz this is saying
it must return a number, but you certainly
wouldn't catch it in the JavaScript case.
Well, later in the course we'll look
at how you could introduce some dynamic
typing, I mean not dynamic typing, but
flexibility in your types to TypeScript.
So this is a good opportunity to talk
about what we're going to cover in
TypeScript Fundamentals.
We're gonna first build a very
small TypeScript program using
the TSC CLI command.
And then we're going to start getting
into the details of the language itself.
We'll cover variables and values,
object, array, and tuple types.
We'll talk a little bit about
the difference between a structural and
nominal type system.
If you've used Java or C Sharp, something
like that, that's a nominal type system.
We'll get into union and
intersection types,
which you can think of as TypeScript's
concept of and and or for types.
We'll talk about giving types names,
kind of the way we can give classes or
functions names.
It allows us to import and
export types across module boundaries.
We can do that with interfaces and
type aliases.
And then as a class we're going
to go through an exercise
where we try to write a type that
describes any valid JSON value.
Which could be, as you know,
objects, it could be arrays,
we can have strings and numbers and
Booleans, null is an allowed JSON value.
So we'll build a type that describes
anything that is valid JSON.
After that we'll get into type
queries which allow us to
extract type information
from existing values.
So if you have a return value from
a function and you wanna create
a new variable whose type is the same
type as what the function returned,
you could extract the type out and
then use it in another place.
That's a type query,
getting a type from a value that you have.
We'll discuss callables and
constructables, which is another way
of saying things you can invoke like
functions and things you can use the new
keyword with like classes when you
create a new instance of a class.
And then towards the end of the class,
we'll talk about type guards and
narrowing, which is the concept of
building branches of code that handle
specific parts of types.
And then we'll get into generics,
which is a really powerful feature
that allows us to parameterize types.
Kind of like how a function
parameterizes a value, right?
You could say, f(x) equals x squared.
We can create a type that is
defined in terms of a variable,
and that variable is a type.
And then we'll wrap up the day by
taking everything we've learned and
building a map, filter, and
reduce kind of utility library.
Which you may be familiar
with using those on arrays.
We're gonna make versions
that work on dictionaries.
So you'll take those same concepts and
we'll sort of handwrite those
utility functions ourselves
with dictionaries in mind.